Suspense about the Outcome

“City on the Edge of the Forever,” an episode of the original “Star Trek” series, dramatizes how suspense is created by the contrast between a roundtrip and a one-way progression.  Because of an accident, the future is altered, and the Starship Enterprise ceases to exist.  Marooned, the Enterprise’s Captain Kirk and First Officer Spock travel through time to 1930’s Chicago to try to return the future to its original form.  In old Chicago, Kirk meets and falls in love with Edith Keeler, a humanitarian leader.  He and Spock ascertain that the future hinges on Keeler’s fate: If she were to die in a car accident, everything would follow its intended course and the Enterprise would be restored.  However, if she were to live, she would organize a pacifist movement that will keep the United States out of World War II, irrevocably changing history.  The future would no longer lead to intergalactic travel.  At the story’s climax, Keeler is crossing a street with Kirk at her side when an on-rushing car swerves towards her.  Kirk must choose whether to save her and alter history or to let her die.  It is a potently dramatic moment: Kirk is faced with the romantically devastating consequences of a strong roundtrip.  He watches helplessly as the car strikes her.  At the story’s end, Kirk, Spock and McCoy are reunited with the Enterprise.

Composers frequently create suspense about the outcome of their work.  They will often withhold the ultimate arrival until the last possible moment, making it more dramatic.

After a slow introduction, the main portion of the first movement of Beethoven’s “Harp” Quartet begins:

Beethoven: String Quartet No. 10, Opus 74
The Budapest String Quartet
CBS MPK 45551

Track 1: 1: 55 – 3:23		Opening of Allegro section of 1st movement

Later, the movement appears to draw to a peaceful close.  However, rather than ending as expected, Beethoven builds to a passage of unparalleled intensity, featuring frenzied passage-work by the first violin.  It places the work’s outcome in doubt: The music’s eventual goal is unclear and suspenseful.  Finally, at the crucial moment, the work’s main theme returns beneath the violin figuration, and the work completes its strong roundtrip.

Track 1: 6: 34 -  8: 30		Close of 1st movement

