In musical terms, a “one-way progression” describes a piece that ends in a significantly different place than it began.  A one-way progression may be achieved when  the ending seems to “forget” or contradict the opening.  For instance, consider the third movement of Webern’s Drei Kleine Stucke for cello and piano.

MUSICAL EXAMPLE
•Webern: Drei Kleine Stucke, opus 11, 3nd movement
Gregor Piatigorsky, Charles Rosen
Sony Classical SM3K 45845

Most of this brief work is concentrated in the low register, with the piano and cello alternating short gestures.  At the end, the piano stops playing, leaving the cello alone to play three harmonics in a row—which it has never done before.  For the first time, the work ascends into a high register.   The ending is an unexpected apotheosis

The first movement of Mel Powell’s Sextets is another example of the ending contradicting the opening.  The work begins—very unusally--with successive solos for the clarinet, cello, flute, violin and piano. The solos overlap slightly, but otherwise each is unaccompanied.

Mel Powell: Sextets, I
California E.A.R. Unit
New World 80616-2

EXAMPLE  
0:00 –  3:23  (I will provide this)

At the movement’s close, the texture is far different: The instruments are joined together in an active and fluid interplay.  Once so isolated from each other, they conclude with a compact, intense group statement, punctuated by the chimes. 

EXAMPLE

7:05 – 8:13

A second way a “one-way progression” may be achieved is through a continuous progression that carries the music far from where it started and never returns. For instance, Gyorgy Ligeti’s Poème Symphonique creates a one-way progression out of a mechanical process.  The piece is scored for 100 wind-up metronomes, each set to a different tempo.  Once all the metronomes are in action, listeners are invited into the hall.  

Musical example
•Ligeti: Poème Symphonique
François Terrioux, metronomes
Sony Classical 62310
(check track number on album)

Opening: 0:00 – 2:00  (fade out)

Gradually, the metronomes wind down, the fast ones first.  The texture gets thinner and thinner until finally only one metronome is left.  The piece ends when the last metronome finally ceases beating.

Ending: (fade in) 17:45 -  19: 44

